Vamos retornar ao manipulador de robô simples
de duas ligações que examinamos muito, muito antes
no curso. Quando olhamos pela primeira vez,
estávamos interessados na cinemática, que é
olhar a relação entre os ângulos da articulação,
Q1 e Q2 e a posição e orientação
do efetuador.
Agora o que vamos fazer é considerar
que essas ligações têm massas, então
coloquei os simbolos do centro de massa
de cada uma dessas ligações. Então, pensamos sobre
como isso funciona mecanicamente na prática: Cada
ligação deve oferecer suporte a todas as outras ligações
que estão além dele e cada ligação é claro,
então suportada por todas as ligações
que estão antes dele.
Portanto, há mecanicamente uma conexão
entre as ligações, e o peso de uma ligação tem que
nascer pela ligação anterior e pela ligação anterior
e assim por diante. Cada ligação, então exerce
uma força e um momento em suas ligações vizinhas.
Portanto, uma maneira realmente útil de considerar
as forças e os momentos que atuam em cada uma dessas
ligações é desenhar um diagrama de corpo livre.
O que fazemos é desconectar as diferentes ligações
e olhar para eles individualmente,
elas são corpos livres.
Cada ligação tem uma massa e a gravidade vai
agir sobre essa massa com uma força para baixo
A base do robô vai exercer uma força vertical
para cima para segurar a ligação vermelha
para impedi-la de cair e a ligação verde
exercerá uma força para baixo
na extremidade da ligação vermelha
devido ao seu próprio peso.
Olhe agora para a ligação verde, haverá uma
força para cima aqui, que é igual e
oposta a força para baixo da ligação vermelha.
Está é a terceira lei de Newton. Então, se houver
uma força para baixo na ligação vermelha é o
peso da ligação verde e há uma força para cima
na ligação verde que é exercida pela
ligação vermelha para mantê-la ativa
Agora há um momento fornecido pelo motor
que aciona a articulação um. Ele está exercendo
um torque para parar a rotada da ligação vermelha.
E da mesma forma, há um torque aplicado a
ligação verde pelo motor da articulação dois para
impedir a ligação verde gire. E então, há
um torque de reação, torque igual e oposto
daquele que é aplicado a ligação vermelha.
Então aqui vemos, todas as forças e momentos
que estão agindo em cada um das ligações de um robô.
Essas forças e momentos dependem da posição de
cada ligação, dependem da velocidade de uma ligação
e a aceleração da ligação e, claro,
elas também dependem da gravidade.
Essas forças e momentos também dependem dos
parâmetros da ligação; a massa real de uma ligação,
sua inércia, seu comprimento e assim pro diante. Então,
vamos dar uma olhada em alguns desses parâmetros de ligação.
Em parâmetros cinemáticos, apresentamos muito
antes no curso, temos o comprimento da ligação
Neste caso, o comprimento A1 do eixo
da junta um ao eixo da junta dois.
E da mesma forma, temos o comprimento da ligação dois
Nós introduzimos o sistema de coordenadas de ligações aqui.
O sistema de coordenadas um é anexado ao final
da ligação um e o sistema de coordenadas dois é
anexado ao sistema de coordenadas da ligação dois.
E observamos os sistemas de coordenadas de ligação novamente,
muito antes quando estávamos considerando a cinemática do
manipulador de ligação serial.
Também podemos descrever a posição do centro de massa
em relação ao sistema coordenada de uma ligação.
frame. In this case, it is a displacement
of C1 in the negative X1 direction. And we
also have a mass associated with a link that's
the mass M1.
Then we also have an inertia. This is the
inertia of the link with respect to its centre
of mass and we can do the same thing for link
two, the distance from the link two coordinate
frame to its centre of mass and the inertia
of link two with respect to its centre of mass.
So we have now quite a number of parameters
associated with each of the links. For each
link, we have a mass, we have a centre of
mass which in the general case would be a
vector described by three numbers and we have
an inertia matrix. This is a 3x3 matrix and
if we consider the inertia with respect to
the centre of mass, that 3x3 is a symmetric matrix.
Now, a symmetric matrix, instead of having
nine unique elements, its got only six unique
elements. In total, we have ten parameters
to describe the dynamics of each link. We
have one mass, we have three translations
to describe the position of the centre of
mass with respect to the link coordinate frame,
and we have six unique elements of the symmetric
inertia matrix, with respect to the centre
of mass.
So for link number one, those parameters are
M1, the centre of mass is negative C1 in the
X direction. The other two elements are zero,
the vector R1, describes the position of the
centre of mass. And in this case, it's negative
C1 and the Y and Z components are equal to zero.
And we have the inertia matrix which has only
got one element and that is the inertia about
the Z axis. Now in this case, the Z axis is
coming at us out of the page. So we have only
one finite element that's IZZ1.
For link two, it looks somewhat similar. These
are the dynamic parameters of each of the
links, sometimes referred to as the inertial
parameters of the links. When it comes to
describing the dynamics of moving bodies,
there are number of different approaches that
we can take, one of the most common of course
is Newton's second law, F = ma which relates
the force applied to the body to the acceleration
that experiences as a function of its mass.
For a rotating body, we can use Euler's equation
which relates the torque applied to its body
given by the symbol tau to its rotational
inertia, J, it's angular rate, Omega, and
its angular acceleration Omega dot.
A quite different approach is Lagrange's equation,
which relates the kinetic, and potential energy
of a body to the derivatives of the Lagrangian
term, T minus V, and the derivatives of Lagrangian
with respect to the generalized coordinates
and the generalized velocities of the bodies
in the mechanism.
We can use any of these approaches to analyze
the dynamics of a serial link manipulator
but in this lecture, we're going to consider
the Newton-Euler method. This is a combination
of Newton's law to describe translational motion and Euler's equation to describe the rotational motion.
A very simple and elegant approach to determining
the dynamic motion of a serial link manipulator
is what's called the recursive Newton-Euler
algorithm. And I'm not going to go into all
of the details here, you find it in many,
many textbooks but what I'm want to do is
give you an intuition for how it works.
And the first step is to determine the translational
and rotational velocity and acceleration for
the center of mass of each of the links. Use
Newton's law for the translational motion
and we use Euler's equation for the rotational
motion.
We start at the base of the robot and we work
outwards, determining the translational and
angular velocity for the centre of mass of each
link in turn. Once we get to the end of the
robot, we then work our way back inwards and
then we determine the force and moment that
each link exerts on the link that's closer
towards the base of the robot. This method
is computationally elegant and very, very
efficient.
I'm going to create a two-link robot in MATLAB.
To do that, I'm going to use toolbox script
mdl_twolink and that will create in the MATLAB
workspace a robot object called two-link.
This is an object that has great number of methods and properties and we'll start to explore some of these.
One of the first ones we're going to look
at is the plot method. So for the robot object
two-link, we’re going to invoke the plot
method so that’s dot plot invokes the plot
method on that object. And I'm going to plot
it for Q1 equal to zero, and Q2 equal to zero.
And here we see the robot manipulator. Unlike
the one we looked at previously which operated
in the XY plane, we can see that this two-link
robot is operating in the XZ plane. So gravitational
acceleration which is in the Z direction is
acting on the centre of mass of each of the
links of this robot and will tend to pull
it down to make it collapse.
And we can use the recursive Newton-Euler
equation and we can, which is the rne method
for recursive Newton-Euler. And I can ask,
what are the torques on this robot if the
joint angles are both equal to zero? So that's
a situation I've just plotted.
And let's say the joints are not moving at
all, so they've got zero velocity each and
the joints are also not accelerating. So they've
each got acceleration of zero.
It says that the torque on the first joint
on Q1 is necessary to hold it in this position
is 19.62 Newton meters and the torque on the
second joint is 4.9 Newton meters. This makes
intuitive sense to us. The torque on the shoulder
joint is going to be greater than the torque
on the elbow joint because the shoulder has
to hold up the upper arm and the lower arm,
where as the elbow joint only has to hold
up the lower part of the arm.
What we don't have a handle on are the signs
of these two torques, which way are they acting.
So a good way to see that is to re-plot the
robot using a different option which is jvek.
What this shows is the access of rotation
of each joint.
So if we remember our right hand rule, in
order to understand the direction of a positive
torque, what we do is grab the axis with our
right hand, point our thumb in the direction
of the arrowhead and curl our fingers around the vector to indicate the direction of positive rotation.
What we can see here then is that a positive
torque of 19.6 acting on a shoulder joint
is going to be a torque that's trying to lift
the robot arm up, which is exactly what we
would expect and similarly for joint two.
So the recursive Newton-Euler algorithm has
given us the torques that are required for
the robot to stay in this particular configuration
with both its joint angles equal to zero and
with zero joint velocity and with zero joint
acceleration. These are the torques that are
required for the robot to be in this configuration
and not move.